Add ERC: Composite EIP-712 Signatures (#993)
ethereum/ERCs: ERCS/erc-7920.md

Current solutions have significant drawbacks:

- **Pre-approving [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) allowance:** spend creates security vulnerabilities
- **Merging multiple messages into a single message:** prevents independent verifiability. Each message cannot be verified without knowledge of the entire batch
- **Separate signature requests:** creates friction in the user experience

## Specification

### Overview

The composite signature scheme uses a Merkle tree to hash multiple typed-data data messages together under a single root. The user signs only the Merkle root. The process is described below.

### Generating a Composite Signature

1. For a set of messages `[m₁, m₂, ..., mₙ]`, encode each using EIP-712's `encode` and compute its hash:

   ```
   hashₙ = keccak256(encode(mₙ))
   ```

> 2. Use these message hashes as leaf nodes in a Merkle tree and compute a `marketRoot`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use these message hashes as leaf nodes in a Merkle tree and compute a `merkleRoot`
```

Typo?

3. Sign the merkle root.

   ```

>    signature = sign(marketRoot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   signature = sign(merkleRoot)
```

Typo?

Author: Day job and moonlight collide. Thanks for spotting, will fix.

```
isVerified = isValidSignature && isValidProof
```

#### Solidity Example

Snippet below verifies a composite signature on-chain. The entrypoint, `placeOrder()` is called by a paymaster to sponsor an operation. It verifies the composite signature using the process outlined above.

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.20;

error Unauthorized();

contract ExampleVerifier {
    bytes32 public immutable DOMAIN_SEPARATOR;
    bytes32 private constant MESSAGE_TYPEHASH =
        keccak256("PlaceOrder(bytes32 orderId, address user)");

    constructor() {
        DOMAIN_SEPARATOR = keccak256(
            abi.encode(
                keccak256(
                    "EIP712Domain(string name,string version,uint256 chainId,address verifyingContract)"
                ),
                keccak256(bytes("MyApp")),
                keccak256(bytes("1.0.0")),
                block.chainid,
                address(this)
            )
        );
    }

    function placeOrder(
        bytes32 orderId,
        address user,
        bytes calldata signature,
        bytes32 merkleRoot,
        bytes32[] calldata proof
    ) public {
        bytes32 message = keccak256(

>             abi.encodePacked(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            abi.encode(
```

Attacker could potentially leverage that `abi.encodePacked` to create hash collisions. Is it intentional?

abi.encode adds padding to maintain 32-byte alignment for each element which is safer. And you were using it in line 92

Author: Overlooked. Will fix

                "\x19\x01",
                DOMAIN_SEPARATOR,
                keccak256(abi.encode(MESSAGE_TYPEHASH, orderId, user))
            )
        );

        if (
            !_verifyCompositeSignature(
                message,
                proof,
                merkleRoot,
                signature,
                user
            )
        ) {
            revert Unauthorized();
        }

        // DO STUFF
    }

    function _verifyCompositeSignature(
        bytes32 message,
        bytes32[] calldata proof,
        bytes32 merkleRoot,
        bytes calldata signature,
        address expectedSigner
    ) internal view returns (bool) {
        if (!_verifyMerkleProof(message, proof, merkleRoot)) {
            return false;
        }

        return recover(merkleRoot, signature) == expectedSigner;
    }

    function _verifyMerkleProof(
        bytes32 leaf,
        bytes32[] calldata proof,
        bytes32 root
    ) internal pure returns (bool) {
        bytes32 computedRoot = leaf;
        for (uint256 i = 0; i < proof.length; ++i) {

>             if (computedRoot < proof[i]) {

Reviewer: Specification should reflect ordering requirements - unless you intentionally don't want to. 

Reference Implementation (Lines 160-168):
// Enforces ordering during verification:
if (computedRoot < proof[i]) {
    computedRoot = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(computedRoot, proof[i]));
} else {
    computedRoot = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(proof[i], computedRoot));
}

Suggested Spec Addition:
"Leaves MUST be ordered lexicographically before tree construction"

```

Result:

```JavaScript
{
  "id": 1,
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "result": {
    "signature": "0x4355c47d63924e8a72e509b65029052eb6c299d53a04e167c5775fd466751c9d07299936d304c153f6443dfa05f40ff007d72911b6f72307f996231605b915621c",
    "merkleRoot": "0x7de103665e21d6c9d9f82ae59675443bd895ed42b571c7f952c2fdc1a5b6e8d2",
    "proofs": [
      ["0x4bdbac3830d492ac3f4b0ef674786940fb33481b32392e88edafd45d507429f2"],
      ["0x95be87f8abefcddc8116061a06b18906f32298a4644882d06baff852164858c6"]
    ]
  }
}
```

## Rationale

### UX Improvement

A single signature that covers multiple messages

### Isolated Verification

Independent verification of messages without knowledge of others

### Human-readable

This ERC preserves the readability benefits of EIP-712. Giving wallets and users insight into what is being signed.

### Efficient verification on-chain

> `_verifyMerkleProof` has a runtime of `O(log(N))` where N is the number of messages that were signed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_verifyMerkleProof` has a runtime of `O(log(N))` where N is the number of messages that were signed.

When N=1, merkleRoot MUST equal keccak256(encode(m₁)) and proofs MUST be empty arrays
```

No explicit requirement for N=1 case handling

Reference Implementation (Lines 100-108):
// Implicitly handles single message via:
bytes32 computedRoot = leaf;
for (uint256 i = 0; i < proof.length; ++i) {
    // ... hashing ...
}
return computedRoot == root;

Suggested Spec Addition:
"When N=1, merkleRoot MUST equal keccak256(encode(m₁)) and proofs MUST be empty arrays"

Reviewer: Also lacks Even/Odd Node Handling

Suggested Spec Addition:
"Implementations MUST pad leaves with zero hashes to reach next power of two"

---
eip: 7920
title: Composite EIP-712 Signatures

> description: Composite EIP-712 signatures using merkle trees.

Reviewer 2: Your description is mostly a restatement of your title. You should use this space to expand on the ideas introduced in your title. In this case, perhaps a definition of "composite" would be appropriate?

- **Pre-approving [ERC-20](./eip-20.md) allowance:** spend creates security vulnerabilities
- **Merging multiple messages into a single message:** prevents independent verifiability. Each message cannot be verified without knowledge of the entire batch
- **Separate signature requests:** creates friction in the user experience

## Specification

### Overview

The composite signature scheme uses a Merkle tree to hash multiple typed-data data messages together under a single root. The user signs only the Merkle root. The process is described below.

### Generating a Composite Signature

1. For a set of messages `[m₁, m₂, ..., mₙ]`, encode each using EIP-712's `encode` and compute its hash:

   ```
   hashₙ = keccak256(encode(mₙ))
   ```

2. Use these message hashes as leaf nodes in a Merkle tree and compute a `merkleRoot`

3. Sign the merkle root.

   ```
   signature = sign(merkleRoot)
   ```

### Verification Process

To verify that an individual message `mₓ` was included in a composite signature:

1. Verify the signature on the `merkleRoot`:

   ```
   recoveredSigner = ecrecover(merkleRoot, signature)
   isValidSignature = (recoveredSigner == expectedSigner)
   ```

> 2. Compute the leaf node for message `mₓ` and verify it's path to the Merkle root, using the proof:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Compute the leaf node for message `mₓ` and verify its path to the Merkle root, using the proof:
```

   ```
   leaf = keccak256(encode(mₓ))
   isValidProof = _verifyMerkleProof(leaf, merkleProof, merkleRoot)
   ```

The message is verified if and only if (1) and (2) succeed.

```
isVerified = isValidSignature && isValidProof
```

> #### Solidity Example

Reviewer 2: Would it make more sense for this to be in the Reference Implementation section?

Snippet below verifies a composite signature on-chain. The entrypoint, `placeOrder()` is called by a paymaster to sponsor an operation. It verifies the composite signature using the process outlined above.

```solidity

> // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Reviewer 2: We only allow CC0-1.0 licensed code inline in the document. You're welcome to include MIT licensed code in your assets directory and link to it there.

                computedRoot = keccak256(abi.encode(proof[i], computedRoot));
            }
        }
        return computedRoot == root;
    }

    function recover(
        bytes32 digest,
        bytes memory signature
    ) internal pure returns (address) {
        require(signature.length == 65, "Invalid signature length");

        bytes32 r;
        bytes32 s;
        uint8 v;

        assembly {
            r := mload(add(signature, 32))
            s := mload(add(signature, 64))
            v := byte(0, mload(add(signature, 96)))
        }

        return ecrecover(digest, v, r, s);
    }
}
```

### Specification of `eth_signTypedData_v5` JSON RPC method.

This ERC adds a new method `eth_signTypedData_v5` to Ethereum JSON-RPC. This method allows signing multiple typed data messages with a single signature using the specification described above. The signing account must be prior unlocked.

This method returns: the signature, merkle root, and an array of proofs (each corresponding to an input message).

#### Parameters

1. `Address` - Signing account
2. `TypedData | TypedDataArray` - A single TypedData object or Array of `TypedData` objects from EIP-712.

> ##### Returns

Reviewer 2: I usually recommend authors provide a JSON Schema along with any new RPC endpoints. It helps ensure consistency between implementations.

```JavaScript
{
  signature: 'DATA',     // Hex encoded 65 byte signature (same format as eth_sign)
  merkleRoot: 'DATA',    // 32 byte Merkle root as hex string
  proofs: [              // Array of Merkle proofs (one for each input message)
    ['DATA', 'DATA'], // First message proof (array of 32 byte hex strings)
    ['DATA', 'DATA'], // Second message proof
    ...
  ]
}
```

##### Example

Request:

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: Instead of wrapping in curl, would it maybe be easier to read if you only provide the JSON input? Running it through a formatter (eg. `jq .`) might help too.

    "merkleRoot": "0x7de103665e21d6c9d9f82ae59675443bd895ed42b571c7f952c2fdc1a5b6e8d2",
    "proofs": [
      ["0x4bdbac3830d492ac3f4b0ef674786940fb33481b32392e88edafd45d507429f2"],
      ["0x95be87f8abefcddc8116061a06b18906f32298a4644882d06baff852164858c6"]
    ]
  }
}
```

## Rationale

### UX Improvement

A single signature that covers multiple messages

### Isolated Verification

Independent verification of messages without knowledge of others

### Human-readable

This ERC preserves the readability benefits of EIP-712. Giving wallets and users insight into what is being signed.

### Efficient verification on-chain

`_verifyMerkleProof` has a runtime of `O(log2(N))` where N is the number of messages that were signed.

When N=1, merkleRoot **must** equal keccak256(encode(m₁)) and proofs MUST be empty arrays

### Improved Wallet Security

Certain messages signed in isolation may appear harmless but combined with may be harmful. Giving the full list of messages to users could help them better navigate their experience.

### Flexible Verification Modes

> Applications can require combination of messages be signed together to enhance security.

Reviewer 2: All of these points seem to fit more in the Motivation section rather than the Rationale. Motivation should justify the proposal as a whole, while the Rationale should explain decisions you made within the document. My favourite analogy is:

> Motivation: We need to build a shed because...
> Rationale: We chose to paint the shed red because...

## Backwards Compatibility

When the number of message is one, `eth_signTypedData_v5` produces the same signature as `eth_signTypedData_v4` since `merkleRoot == keccak256(encode(message))`. This allows `eth_signTypedData_v5` to be a drop-in replacement for `eth_signTypedData_v4` with no changes to on-chain verification.

## Reference Implementation

> Reference implementation of `eth_signTypedData_v5` can be found the assets directory.

Reviewer 2: You can and should link directly to the file (something like `../assets/erc-7920/eth_signTypedData_v5.ts`)

## Security Considerations

### Replay Protection

This ERC focuses on generating composite messages and verifying their signatures. It does not contain mechanisms to prevent replays. Developers **must** ensure their applications can handle receiving the same message twice.

### Partial Message Verification

During verification, care **must** be taken to ensure that **both** of these checks pass:

1. EIP-712 signature on the Merkle root is valid
2. Merkle proof is valid against the root

### User Understanding

Wallets **must** communicate to users that they are signing multiple messages at once. Wallets **must** display of all message types before signing.

> To ensure batch signature requests are digestible, it is recommended max number of messages is at most 10.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure batch signature requests are digestible, it is recommended to limit the maximum number of messages to 10.
```

### Merkle Tree Construction

Merkle tree should be constructed in a consistent manner.

1. The hashing function **must** be `keccak256`
2. To ensure predictable/consistent proof sizes, implementations **must** pad leaves with zero hashes to reach next power of two to ensure balance. Let `n` be the number of messages. Before constructing the tree, compute the smallest `k` such that `2^(k-1) < n ≤ 2^k`. Insert zero hashes into the list of messages until list of messages is equal to `2^k`.
3. To ensure an implicit verification path, pairs **must** be sorted lexicographically before constructing parent hash.

> #### Tree Reference Implementation

Reviewer 2: Large code snippets like this should be in the Reference Implementation section. You can use an `[anchor link](#some-heading)` to refer to it.
